doc: gsg: Edit instructions to set SDK env vars (#46365)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/develop/getting_started/index.rst

It also contains additional host tools, such as custom QEMU and OpenOCD builds
that are used to emulate, flash and debug Zephyr applications.

> .. note::
>    Before installing, check whether the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` or
>    :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables are already set.
> 
>    * If the variables are not set, the latest compatible version of the Zephyr SDK will be selected by default.
>      Proceed to next step without making any changes.
> 
>    * If :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` is set, the corresponding toolchain will be selected at build time
>      instead of the Zephyr SDK. Either unset the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` environment variable or change its
>      value to ``zephyr`` to make sure the Zephyr SDK is selected.
> 
>    * If the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable is set, it will override the lookup location
>      for the selected toolchain. If you install the Zephyr SDK to one of the locations recommended below,
>      you can unset this variable. Otherwise, set it to your chosen install location.

Reviewer: I don't think this belongs here.

New users starting out with Zephyr or installing on a clean machine doesn't need to carry out those steps. They are imho just noise in those cases.

We should try to keep the guide as simple as possible without unnecessary steps for newcomers.

Instead this belongs in an *Updating Zephyr SDK* section or a trouble shooting section as this may only happen to users updating an existing system (which is beyond getting started).

If you add a *Update Zephyr SDK* section to the [Zephyr SDK](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/toolchains/zephyr_sdk.html) page then you can simple change the note to:
```suggestion
.. note::
   If you're updating the Zephyr SDK from an older release, please read :ref:`update_sdk`
``` 

Another option is to change the note to pure text and move it downwards to a *Troubleshooting* subsection. That subsection can then include the [asking-for-help](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/getting_started/index.html#asking-for-help) subsection.

This will be more aligned with what we have for [devicetree](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/dts/index.html) and [west](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/west/index.html) where there exists dedicated [Troubleshooting](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/west/troubleshooting.html) sections for users experiencing problems.

Author: I went for adding a Troubleshooting section.

            sudo cp ~/zephyr-sdk-0.14.2/sysroots/x86_64-pokysdk-linux/usr/share/openocd/contrib/60-openocd.rules /etc/udev/rules.d
            sudo udevadm control --reload

      .. note::

>          Make sure the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables

Reviewer 2: Wait, why? These environment variables are optional these days; the default toolchain variant is `zephyr` if not set, and the installation directory is auto-discovered from a set of standard paths if not set. The "Make sure" language here suggests they are mandatory.

Reviewer 3: I like this edit, because for some projects, the `ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` value was set to something other than `zephyr`, and when installing the new Zephyr toolchain, the old value is left untouched. This means the new install actually doesn't use the new toolchain, but uses whatever toolchain was previously installed. 

I think it is useful to have this mentioned as part of the gsg, because this is (indirectly) where a lot of users will be going to update their toolchain, and they (like me, at first) may not know or remember to even check the `ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT`

I agree, however, that the "Make sure" phrasing is misleading.

Perhaps better phrasing would be:

```rst
.. note::
        Make sure the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables
        If you are installing the Zephyr toolchain to replace an existing Zephyr-compatible toolchain, check
        whether the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables
        are set.
	
        If they are not set, you may proceed without making any changes (the new Zephyr toolchain will be selected
        by default).

        If they have a value, this will override Zephyr's default toolchain selection, and may prevent the Zephyr
        toolchain from being selected. In this case, either delete them, or set :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT`
	to ``zephyr`` and set :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` to your Zephyr SDK installation directory. This
	will cause the Zephyr toolchain to be selected.
```

Though it is unclear to me what the ``zephyr`` toolchain variant actually does (does it cause the default selection process to occur, or does it specifically choose the Zephyr toolchain? Is "the Zephyr toolchain" even correct terminology, here?

Author: @glarsennordic , applied an edited version of your proposal *before* the installation steps. This is because the proposal reads like something you should be aware of before you start installing the SDK. Placing it before also allows to avoid duplicating the content in each tab.

Reviewer 2: @glarsennordic 

The text

```
        If you are installing the Zephyr toolchain to replace an existing Zephyr-compatible toolchain, check
```

seems out of place for a document called the "Getting started guide".

A perennial problem that we face with this document is that everybody wants to include the little bits and pieces that they learned over time when adjusting their environment to fit their use cases, but these end up being noise for people who are really just getting started for the first time. We need to keep fighting to keep this document as short as possible, because installing zephyr is already complex enough.

         are set correctly (to ``zephyr`` and your Zephyr SDK installation directory, respectively).
         See the :ref:`toolchain_zephyr_sdk_bundle_variables` section for details.

> 

Reviewer 2: Nothing wrong with this line, but please refer to the commit (0a758c36c864cc138941848f42c8ea4aa7dc95b3) instead of the pull request number (PR#46319) in the commit log.

Git is a decentralized version control system. Commits are "forever" and "global" objects across forks. Pull request numbers are specific to individual forks. So the log will be clearer if you use the commit instead. This also allows people to figure out the changes you are talking about even when they are offline.

Author: This is now applied, thanks!

Reviewer 2: @greg-fer the commit log says:

```
Edited the changes added in commit #0a758c3.
```

it should say:

```
Edited the changes added in commit 0a758c3.
```

Commit SHAs are not numbers :).

            sudo cp ~/zephyr-sdk-0.14.2/sysroots/x86_64-pokysdk-linux/usr/share/openocd/contrib/60-openocd.rules /etc/udev/rules.d
            sudo udevadm control --reload

      #. Make sure the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables
         are set correctly (to ``zephyr`` and your Zephyr SDK installation directory, respectively).

>          See the :ref:`toolchain_zephyr_sdk_bundle_variables` section for details.

Reviewer 4: See https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/46319#discussion_r890599871 and https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/46319#discussion_r890602240

            You must rerun the setup script if you relocate the Zephyr SDK bundle directory after
            the initial setup.

      #. Make sure the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables
         are set correctly (to ``zephyr`` and your Zephyr SDK installation directory, respectively).

>          See the :ref:`toolchain_zephyr_sdk_bundle_variables` section for details.

Reviewer 4: same deal

Author: Edited as per comment https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/46365#discussion_r892052828

            You must rerun the setup script if you relocate the Zephyr SDK bundle directory after
            the initial setup.

      #. Make sure the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` and :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables
         are set correctly (to ``zephyr`` and your Zephyr SDK installation directory, respectively).

>          See the :ref:`toolchain_zephyr_sdk_bundle_variables` section for details.

Reviewer 4: ditto

* Discover :ref:`project-resources` for getting help from the Zephyr
  community

.. _troubleshooting_installation:

Troubleshooting installation
****************************

Here are some tips for fixing some issues related to the installation process.

.. _toolchain_zephyr_sdk_update:

Double check Zephyr SDK variables when updating
===============================================

When updating Zephyr SDK, check whether the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` or :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables are already set.
See :ref:`gs_toolchain_update` for more information.

For more information about these environmental variables in Zephyr, see :ref:`env_vars_important`.

.. _help:

Asking for Help

> ===============

Reviewer 2: Why is this needed?

Author: OK, reverting.

* Discover :ref:`project-resources` for getting help from the Zephyr
  community

.. _troubleshooting_installation:

Troubleshooting installation
****************************

Here are some tips for fixing some issues related to the installation process.

.. _toolchain_zephyr_sdk_update:

Double check Zephyr SDK variables when updating
===============================================

When updating Zephyr SDK, check whether the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` or :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables are already set.

* If the variables are not set, the latest compatible version of the Zephyr SDK will be selected by default.
  Proceed to next step without making any changes.

> * If :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` is set, the corresponding toolchain will be selected at build time
>   instead of the Zephyr SDK. Either unset the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` environment variable or change its
>   value to ``zephyr`` to make sure the Zephyr SDK is selected.

Reviewer: > corresponding toolchain will be selected at build time instead of the Zephyr SDK.

Well, only if the value is different from `zephyr` :wink: 

How about:
```suggestion
If :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` is set, the corresponding toolchain will be selected at build time. Zephyr SDK is identified by the value `zephyr`.
If :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` environment variable is not ``zephyr``, then either unset it or change its value to ``zephyr`` to make sure the Zephyr SDK is selected.
```

Note: this still only refers to the environment variable. In pratice the CMakeCache takes precedence, but I think we can wait for #40389 before cleaning up this.
For now, i'm satisfied with just referring to the envvar to keep things simple for the users.

* If the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable is set, it will override the lookup location

>   for the selected toolchain. If you install the Zephyr SDK to one of the locations recommended below,

Reviewer: Not sure I understand the meaning of this sentence:
>  If the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable is set, it will override the lookup location for the selected toolchain. 

So if I set `ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT` to `gnuarmemb`, then how will setting `ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` impact the lookup of the `gnuarmemb` toolchain ?

Author: Summoning @glarsennordic  for this technical question :)

Reviewer 3: My apologies, I'm not actually 100% sure whether `ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` applies only when `ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT="zephyr"` or if it impacts the lookup location for all of the toolchains.

> the selected toolchain

was sloppy phrasing on my part. It may be accurate, or it may not be. Someone actually familiar with the build configuration variables needs to chime in, and I don't know who that is.

If it only affects the zephyr SDK specifically, than better phrasing would be:

```rst
* If the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable is set, it will override the lookup location
  for the Zephyr SDK. If you install the Zephyr SDK to one of the locations recommended below,
```

Do we have any kind of reference documentation specifically dedicated to these environment variables, their function, and their possible values? That would help quite a bit.

Author: Applied edits.

Reviewer: I just discovered `toolchain` has been changed to `Zephyr SDK` making the sentence clearer in meaning 👍 .
No further comments.

* Discover :ref:`project-resources` for getting help from the Zephyr
  community

.. _troubleshooting_installation:

Troubleshooting Installation
****************************

Here are some tips for fixing some issues related to the installation process.

.. _toolchain_zephyr_sdk_update:

Double Check the Zephyr SDK Variables When Updating
===================================================

When updating Zephyr SDK, check whether the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT`
or :envvar:`ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR` environment variables are already set.
See :ref:`gs_toolchain_update` for more information.

> For more information about these environmental variables in Zephyr, see :ref:`env_vars_important`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about these environment variables in Zephyr, see :ref:`env_vars_important`.
```
